[DOC] Add instance segmentation tutorial (#1777)
open-edge-platform/training_extensions: docs/source/guide/tutorials/base/how_to_train/instance_segmentation.rst

Instance Segmentation model
================================

This tutorial reveals end-to-end solution from installation to model export and optimization for instance segmentation task on a specific example.
On this page we show how to train, validate, export and optimize Mask-RCNN model on toy dataset.

.. note::

  To learn how to deploy the trained model, refer to :doc:`../deploy`.

  To learn how to run the demo and visualize results, refer to :doc:`../demo`.

The process has been tested on the following configuration.

- Ubuntu 20.04
- NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090

> - CUDA Toolkit 11.4

Reviewer: please, add CPU

Author: yes i will add

*************************
Setup virtual environment
*************************

You can follow the installation process from a :doc:`quick_start guide <../../../get_started/quick_start_guide/installation>` to create a virtual environment.

***************************
Dataset preparation
***************************

1. Let's use the simple toy dataset `Car, Tree, Bug dataset <https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/training_extensions/tree/develop/tests/assets/car_tree_bug>`_ 
provided by OTX.

This dataset contains images of simple car, tree, bug with the annotation for instance segmentation.

- ``car``	- Car Shape Illustration
- ``tree``	- Tree Shape Illustration
- ``bug``	- Bug Shape Illustration

This allows us to look at the structure of the dataset used in instance-segmentation, and can be a good starting point for how to start an instance segmentation task with OTX.

|

.. image:: ../../../../../utils/images/car_tree_bug_gt_sample.png
  :width: 400

|

> 2. Check the file structure of downloaded repository,

Reviewer: what is the "downloaded repository"? Please, correct that

Author: Yes I will fix this.

we will need the following files:

.. code-block::

  car_tree_bug
  ├── annotations/
    ├── instances_train.json
    └── instances_val.json
  ├──images/
    └── <images>
  ...

.. warning::

>   There may be features that don't work properly with the current toy dataset. We recommend that you proceed with a proper training and validation dataset, this tutorial and dataset are for reference only.

Reviewer: Why some features can work bad with toy dataset?

Author: This is a very small dataset, with 4 train and 2 val. While training may be fine (or even poorly trained), the small amount of data can cause issues, especially in optimization. In my opinion, this tutorial should be updated in the future with a proper dataset.

I also tried to use the WGISD dataset, but it doesn't work properly due to structural problems in instance segmentation (detection is working). for now, Since there is no time, it seems good to write with this data and update it later.

2. We need to create 
an OTX-workspace first.

Let's prepare an OTX instance segmentation workspase running the following command:

.. code-block::

  (otx) ...$ otx build --task instance_segmentation --model MaskRCNN-ResNet50

  [*] Workspace Path: otx-workspace-INSTANCE_SEGMENTATION
  [*] Load Model Template ID: Custom_Counting_Instance_Segmentation_MaskRCNN_ResNet50
  [*] Load Model Name: MaskRCNN-ResNet50
  [*]     - Updated: otx-workspace-INSTANCE_SEGMENTATION/model.py
  [*]     - Updated: otx-workspace-INSTANCE_SEGMENTATION/data_pipeline.py
  [*]     - Updated: otx-workspace-INSTANCE_SEGMENTATION/tile_pipeline.py
  [*]     - Updated: otx-workspace-INSTANCE_SEGMENTATION/deployment.py
  [*]     - Updated: otx-workspace-INSTANCE_SEGMENTATION/hpo_config.yaml
  [*]     - Updated: otx-workspace-INSTANCE_SEGMENTATION/compression_config.json
  [*] Update data configuration file to: otx-workspace-INSTANCE_SEGMENTATION/data.yaml

  (otx) ...$ cd ./otx-workspace-INSTANCE_SEGMENTATION

> It will create **otx-workspace-INSTANCE_SEGMENTATION** with all necessery configs for MobileNet-V3-large-1x, prepared ``data.yaml`` to simplify CLI commands launch and splitted dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will create **otx-workspace-INSTANCE_SEGMENTATION** with all necessery configs for MaskRCNN-ResNet50, prepared ``data.yaml`` to simplify CLI commands launch and splitted dataset.
```

Author: i'll fix it

.. note::

>   Using ``otx train`` with TEMPLATE allows you to run the training directly without ``otx build``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  You can use ``otx train`` directly without ``otx build``. It will be required to add ``--train-data-roots`` and ``--val-data-roots`` in the command line
```

Author: i'll add it

  However, this requires ``--train-data-roots`` and ``--val-data-roots`` in the command.

  .. code-block::

>     (otx) ...$ otx train MaskRCNN-ResNet50 \

Reviewer: Please, use there ``otx train`` without any additional options since we inside workspace

Author: This is about how to train without using build and is in the `note:` paragraph.

                      --train-data-roots  /home/<username>/training_extensions/tests/assets/car_tree_bug \
                      --val-data-roots /home/<username>/training_extensions/tests/assets/car_tree_bug \
                      params --learning_parameters.num_iters 8

>   The above command also creates an ``otx-workspace-INSTANCE_SEGMENTATION``, just like running build. This also updates ``data.yaml`` with data-specific commands.

Reviewer: We already created workspace and mention that. Please, delete this line

Author: In the documentation, I've separated how to train with workspace as main and without case (with :note paragraphs). This sentence is for train if user don't have a workspace.

  For more information, see :doc:`quick start guide <../../../get_started/quick_start_guide/cli_commands>`

> 3. Next, we need to create 

Reviewer: We already created it with ``otx build``

Author: Fixed a misleading sentence.

train/validation sets. 

> To simplify the command line functions calling, we may create a ``data.yaml`` file with annotations info and pass it as a ``--data`` parameter. The content of the ``otx-workspace-INSTANCE_SEGMENTATION/data.yaml`` for dataset should have absolute paths and will be similar to that:

Reviewer: Please, mention, that `otx build` will create `data.yaml` by default

Author: Yes I added this to the note: paragraph.

.. note::
  You can modify the required arguments in ``data.yaml`` or use the command to provide the required arguments.

.. code-block::

  {'data':
    {
    'train':
      {'data-roots': '/home/<username>/training_extensions/tests/assets/car_tree_bug'},
    'val':
      {'data-roots': '/home/<username>/training_extensions/tests/assets/car_tree_bug'},
    'test':
      {'data-roots': '/home/<username>/training_extensions/tests/assets/car_tree_bug'}
    }
  }

> ``Ann-files`` contains a path to the annotation, while ``data-roots`` is a path to the folder, where images are stored.

Reviewer: we don't have "ann-files" now

Author: i'll fix it

> 4. To start training we need 

Reviewer: I think there some mismatch in consequence commands. Let's use only one ``otx train`` command example.
Also, I would suggest refer to https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/training_extensions/blob/develop/docs/source/guide/tutorials/base/how_to_train/classification.rst more then OD tutorial, since they are different. We intended to make OD more deep while other tutorials should be like live examples on specific dataset

Author: I found that the OD tutorial didn't work for me, so I mainly referred to the classification tutorial.
However, I don't think all commands can be the same, so there may be some differences. But for the most part, i try to match commands.

Reviewer: I was just mislead by many "otx train" commands with and without otx workspace

to call ``otx train``
command in our worspace:

.. code-block::

  (otx) .../otx-workspace-INSTANCE_SEGMENTATION$ otx train \
                                                    params --learning_parameters.num_iters 10

.. warning::

>   Since this is a very small dataset, we adjusted ``num_iters`` to avoid overfitting in this tutorial.

Reviewer: I think it is not useful for this dataset since it is only have 3-4 images. It is just test dummy images, we can omit adjustment of the training to avoid overfitting

Author: Well I've been thinking a lot about this, it doesn't work right now if I don't give `num_iters`, it causes problems when I run it multiple times, especially the nncf optimization part. I think this needs to be updated by changing the dataset.

***********
Validation
***********

1. ``otx eval`` runs evaluation of a trained
model on a specific dataset.

The eval function receives test annotation information and model snapshot, trained in the previous step.
Please note, ``label_schema.json`` file contains meta-information about the dataset and it should be located in the same folder as the model snapshot.

``otx eval`` will output a F-measure for instance segmentation.

2. The command below will run validation on our dataset
and save performance results in ``performance.json`` file:

.. code-block::

  (otx) ...$ otx eval --test-data-roots /home/<username>/training_extensions/tests/assets/car_tree_bug \
                      --load-weights models/weights.pth \
                      --save-performance performance.json

We will get a similar to this validation output:

.. code-block::

  ...

  2023-02-21 22:37:10,263 | INFO : Inference completed
  2023-02-21 22:37:10,263 | INFO : called evaluate()
  2023-02-21 22:37:10,265 | INFO : F-measure after evaluation: 0.33333333333333326
  2023-02-21 22:37:10,265 | INFO : Evaluation completed
  Performance(score: 0.33333333333333326, dashboard: (1 metric groups))

.. note::

>   You can omit ``--test-data-roots`` if you are currently inside a workspace and have test-data stuff written in ``data.yaml``.

Reviewer: Is it working? Because I remember that `otx eval` required for me "--test-data-roots" and "--load-weights" paths even inside workspace

Author: Yes this works fine.

  Also, if you're inside a workspace and ``weights.pth`` exists in ``models`` dir, you can omit ``--load-weights`` as well, assuming those weights are the default as ``models/weights.pth``.

>   If you omit ``--save-performance``, it will create a ``performance.json`` in the folder for those weights.

Reviewer: please, add a .. note:: here

Author: This is already included in the note: paragraph. Do you want to separate it into another paragraph?

2. We can run the below command line to export the trained model
and save the exported model to the ``openvino_model`` folder.

.. code-block::

  (otx) ...$ otx export --load-weights models/weights.pth \
                        --save-model-to openvino_model

  ...
  [ SUCCESS ] Generated IR version 11 model.
  [ SUCCESS ] XML file: /tmp/OTX-task-51omlxb0/stage00_DetectionExporter-train/model.xml
  [ SUCCESS ] BIN file: /tmp/OTX-task-51omlxb0/stage00_DetectionExporter-train/model.bin

  2023-02-21 22:38:21,893 - mmdeploy - INFO - Successfully exported OpenVINO model: /tmp/OTX-task-51omlxb0/stage00_DetectionExporter-train/model_ready.xml
  2023-02-21 22:38:21,894 | INFO : run task done.
  2023-02-21 22:38:21,940 | INFO : Exporting completed

3. We can check the accuracy of the IR model and the consistency between the exported model and the PyTorch model,
using ``otx eval`` and passing the IR model path to the ``--load-weights`` parameter.

.. code-block::

>   (otx) ...$ otx eval --test-data-roots /home/<username>/training_extensions/tests/assets/car_tree_bug \

Reviewer: Also, in all commands we can use just "workspace/splitted_dataset/ .... " and not mention the "/home/<username>"

Author: Yes, I'll fix it.

  2023-02-21 22:39:18,309 | INFO : OpenVINO inference completed
  2023-02-21 22:39:18,309 | INFO : Start OpenVINO metric evaluation
  2023-02-21 22:39:18,310 | INFO : OpenVINO metric evaluation completed
  Performance(score: 0.33333333333333326, dashboard: (1 metric groups))

*************
Optimization
*************

1. We can further optimize the model with ``otx optimize``.
It uses NNCF or POT depending on the model format.

Please, refer to :doc:`optimization explanation <../../../explanation/additional_features/models_optimization>` section to get the intuition of what we use under the hood for optimization purposes.

2. Command example for optimizing
a PyTorch model (`.pth`) with OpenVINO™ NNCF.

.. code-block::

  (otx) ...$ otx optimize --load-weights models/weights.pth --save-model-to nncf_model

  ...

  2023-02-21 22:45:35,996 | INFO : run task done.
  2023-02-21 22:45:36,012 | INFO : Inference completed
  2023-02-21 22:45:36,013 | INFO : called evaluate()
  2023-02-21 22:45:36,014 | INFO : F-measure after evaluation: 0.33333333333333326
  2023-02-21 22:45:36,014 | INFO : Evaluation completed
  Performance(score: 0.33333333333333326, dashboard: (1 metric groups))

> The optimization time relies on the hardware characteristics, for example on 1 GeForce 3090 and Intel(R) Core(TM) i9-10980XE it took about 10 minutes.

Reviewer: 10 minutes for this dataset? Isn't it to much?

Author: Thanks for looking. I'll fix it.
